We are going to begin this section of the course on algebra 2 talking about summation and products and
I will also tell you about a cumulative sum along the way you will get a bit of a reminder about lists.
This particular variable type in Python called a list.
All right.
So let's get started.
So imagine you have a set a so there's some variable a.
And that refers to this set of numbers so it's five numbers in this set.
Now of course you could add all of these numbers together and you would write that out like this.
So one plus three plus four and cetera and that gives you 15.
Now this is fine but if I wanted to add more numbers to this set or if I wanted to indicate this summation
in a more general way that is not specifically tied to these individual numbers that I picked then how
could we do that.
Well one way you could think of doing that is by using subscript like this so you say a 1 plus a 2.
And now the one and the two is referring not to the number one and the number two but the first element
of the set.
And the second element of the set.
So a two here actually corresponds with the number three and a n is just the numbers of the last number
which here is six.
Now this is also fine but this requires a little bit more writing out.
So there is an even more compact way of representing the sum of a set of numbers.
And that is to use this summation sine.
So this is often used in mathematics to indicate summation.
It's a capital Greek character Sigma and the way you interpret this is that you are summing together
all of the elements in this set a so a for the ISF element and then ice starts at 1 and it goes up to
n now counting from one to end of course is how we do things in math this is how do you account in normal
like human language and when we switch to Python Of course then you're counting with zeros.
So this would actually go in Python this would go I equals zero to end minus one on the other hand there's
actually a python function that will do the summation for you and I'll show you that in a moment.
OK.
So this is for adding together a bunch of numbers.
What if we wanted to take the product of a bunch of numbers.
So one times three times four and so on again of course you can just write it all out like this but
it's nice to have a more general way of indicating this operation of multiplying all of the elements
in a set and exactly like on the previous slide you can write it out like this but there's also a mathematical
notation for the product which looks almost exactly the same as the summation sine except it's a capital
pie instead of a sigma.
Now of course you're familiar with the lower case pie that you learn about in trigonometry and it's
related to circles and so on.
This is the upper case version of that same Greek letter pi.
OK.
So this means that you multiply all the elements instead of summing all of the elements.
So that's for summation and products.
And the next thing I want to tell you about is something called a cumulative sum.
It's like a sum except it's cumulative.
So it's ongoing.
So here the notation is slightly different.
So we say that the K if element of some vector Y some variable Y is equal to the sum not of all the
elements in the set a but just the first k.
So let me break this down to explain this more clearly.
So the first element in Y is y ones of k equals 1.
And then so that would be from i equals 1 to K is 1.
So that's just a.
So the first element is Y is simply the first element in the set A and then the second element is in
Y is A1 plus a.
So the sum of the first two elements the third element is the sum of the first three elements here and
so on until you get to the end.
So then for every case element in the output vector y all you have to do is sum up all of the individual
elements in a all the way up to the K if element.
All right.
Now let's switch to Python.
You'll see that it's actually easier to implement this stuff in Python than it is to explain it.
So we are going to be using the NUM pi module so let's say import num pi as in P and let's create the
list.
I'm going to say LSD.
This is the variable name I'm gonna use for this.
You don't want to use the variable name.
L I SD.
In fact you can use this because this is a reserved keyword.
This is a function list for actually converting something into a list.
So let's just actually see what happens if I try to create a variable that is a python keyword.
So unfortunately it actually works but that's going to create some confusion.
So that means that this operation is technically legal to do.
It's just a terrible idea.
So I'm going to remove the I here to be more consistent with good practice in programming.
Okay.
So the function to sum up a list there is actually a function that's already in the default Python workspace
and that's just some.
So some l s t and we can seize.
The answer is 15 and let's confirm that quickly.
So one plus three is four plus four is eight plus one is nine plus six gives us 15.
So some works here.
There's also a corresponding function in the NUM pi module which is also called Sum and of course that
also gives 15.
And now let's see this is just a quick reminder about how things work in Python.
So now I'm asking for the sum of the list and also num pi some list so you might naively expect to see
two answers here to 15s printing out but actually you only see one and that's because python is only
going to show or least the Jupiter notebook is only going to show the output for the last piece of code
that's run in a cell.
So if you want to print out both of these results then you would have to use print so you could say
print this and print that.
And now we are actually going to get two answers 15 corresponding to this function and 15 corresponding
to num paid out sum.
All right.
So that's pretty straightforward.
It's also pretty straightforward to compute the product.
So N.P. dot pride.
So the function is just called product.
And this one is actually also pretty simple to confirm mentally because we can basically just ignore
the ones for the product.
So it's really just three times four is twelve and twelve times four is seventy two and that's the answer.
All right.
So now let me show you the cumulative sum that function is called QM sum for a cumulative sum and then
the input variable.
So now you can see that the output is a is an array it's a num pi array and let's again think about
how we can arrive at this conclusion here at this answer.
So the first element in the cumulative sum is the sum of all the numbers in the list from the first
element to the current element while the current element is the first one.
So you know one plus nothing.
Well that's just one.
So it is itself OK.
Then the next one is one plus three.
And then the next one is going to be one plus three plus four which is eight.
Now you have to be mindful here that which you're not doing so the wrong way to do this is to sum the
existing numbers in the cumulative sum.
That's not the way it works.
You always go back to the original array the original list and you sum all of those numbers.
So then we add one to that list and we get nine and then we add 16 and we get 15 here.
All right.
And now what I'd like to do is just make a simple plot.
So let's say peel to dot plot and I'm going to plot the list.
Let's make this be red squares with lines connecting the squares.
Now I'm sure that right now while you're watching this you are screaming at your monitor saying No Mike
you can't do this it's going to crash.
And of course it's going to crash because the name P ulti is not defined and that's not defined because
we haven't yet imported map plot lives.
I'm going to write import met plot lib dot pie plot as P L T and then I run this code again and now
I can run this and I hope you're not screaming at me anymore.
All right.
So this is just a list of numbers.
It was 1 3 4 1 6 and now I'm going to plot on top of that the cumulative sum.
So.
And Peter Kumar's loops cumulative some of the list.
And how about we make this blue circles
all right.
So now here you see the individual numbers and the numbers being summed together and maybe be good to
add a label to this.
So you now know from the previous section of this course that you can add labels this way you can say
label equals and you can also do it here.
So I'm going to write a plot that legend and then as a list I will call this the well list.
Maybe I'll call this the set and then here we have cumulative sum now it's time for the exercise for
this video.
There are in fact two exercises here.
So what you want to do is start with this set a it's just the numbers one two three four five and then
you want to test whether this equality is true and whether this equality is true.
So this says whether the sum of a is the sum of all these numbers divided by the sum of a squared is
equal to one over the sum of a.
And now you have to be careful with this notation.
This is each individual element of a squared and then you sum all of those together.
That's not the same thing as summing those elements together and then squaring the resulting summation.
So this one is a little bit tricky because actually if you would just imagine for a moment ignoring
these summation signs.
So pretend this is just a and a is just a single number.
So if this were so ignoring these summations a divided by a squared actually is the same thing as one
over a.
And the question is whether that equality also holds for this summation.
It's an interesting question.
OK.
And then you repeat the procedure using products.
So the product of the set a divided by the product of a squared and whether that equals one over the
product of a good.
So now is your opportunity to pause the video and work through this on your own.
Come up with some answers to this.
And when you've solved this in Python for these specific numbers then you can come back and see if you
can figure out maybe using a piece of paper and a pencil why this is true or not true and why this is
true or not true.
All right.
So let's get started.
So I'm going to start by saying writing out this set and that was called a So set a equals and I will
use the NUM PI that a range function and then s and then I'll say one comma six so we can just look
at this.
That's going to give me the numbers 1 through 5 and this variable type is a num pi array.
OK.
So now what I'm going to do so actually I'm just going to start here with the summation.
So that was like question number one or do it like this.
So now let's create a new variable we'll call this the let's call this some A equals the NUM PI that
sum of a and then some a two where the two is kind of like four A squared equals P dot sum.
And now we want to say a star star 2.
And the reason why I'm creating these separate variables in this way is that now I can say answer one
equals sum a divided by sum a squared whereas answer 2 equals 1 divided by sum.
Hey so remember these are the two equations the two fractions that we are trying to test in python.
All right.
So now I'm going to do some printing so let's say print.
Let's see.
I call this option 1 equals.
And then it's going to be percent s and then I'm going to replace this with answer 1.
And now I'm gonna run all this code first just to make sure I haven't made any mistakes.
Okay.
So I haven't made any mistakes it looks like everything worked out fine.
So now copy and paste I say.
Option 2 equals answer 2.
So if those two fractions are equal to each other.
So this thing in this thing then I should get the same answer four ends one and answer two huh.
And in fact they are different.
They are not the same.
So I'm going to talk in a moment when I go back to the slides about why that is the case but for now
I just want to show you an alternative for printing out two lines like this.
So instead of issuing two separate print commands like this you can also do something like this.
So now I'm going to write slash n and this slash and gets interpreted as a new line character.
So now I have all of the print statements that I want on the same lines in the same print function.
OK.
But this does mean that there's two percent S's in here.
So this needs to be an S one.
Okay.
Whoops.
And then there's an extra space in there.
All right.
So now you still get this dual line output.
So this was for summation.
Now I'm basically going to repeat this thing floor products and let's see how much I can copy and paste
from here.
So I don't need to copy and paste a because the set is the same.
However all of these sums here need to change to products this prod and prod.
Now in theory I could actually leave these variables the same.
And it's still going to work.
But this is confusing variable so anyone else who reads your code is going to be horribly confused.
So I'm going to write prod instead of some.
So let's see.
Copy and paste and then here paste OK so I don't really know if in this case I actually really saved
much time by copying pasting.
But anyway.
Huh.
So now I run this and we get exactly the same result for both of these cases.
So it seems like the answer is that these two are not equal.
And these two are equal.
So why is that the case so actually for summation for addition it's easy to see that this is not the
case.
You just run it with a few examples and you will see that you don't really get much in the way of cancellation
but for products it turns out that you do get a lot of cancellations and you can go through this with
individual numbers.
But in fact I think it's easier and also better to see this by replacing the numbers with letters.
And now we don't have to think about what these letters stand for we just know that each letter corresponds
to an individual number.
And when you write it out this way.
So writing out all of the individual products rather than using the product symbol you can see that
for every letter that's on the numerator you have the same letters squared in the denominator.
So of course each one of these is going to cancel.
All right.
So I discussed the mathematical notations and Python codes for sums and products and cumulative sums.
And you learned yet again this is something I'm really trying to illustrate throughout this course.
How to use Python as a tool for helping you understand and investigate mathematical claims and mathematical
principles.